whether trump wins or loses the
presidential election
he has gained many more votes overall
than 2016.
does this show that his message
resonates more than ever with the
american people
lisa uh i was just
well you will be up in a minute jan or
you can kick us off if you like
you're chomping at the bit let's hear
from you well
yes um the thing is that the
pollster said that there was going to be
a blue wave
and we were going to lose seats instead
the support for trump has gone
weeks we call it going down ballot
and it has had a wide impact
right yes he said he he certainly i mean
at least it's a very fair point that jan
makes in that the polls were showing
that biden was going to
win reasonably easily that's not
happening at the moment we still don't
know who's going to win of course
but trump has increased more people have
voted for trump this time than they did
last time yeah i think what this has
shown is that america is a very
deeply divided country it the 2016
election revealed huge divisions in
american society and
my impression from the turnout figures
that joe biden is
of course to win more votes than any
presidential candidate in history but
donald trump has also
increased the number of votes that he's
got the impression that
i get from the results that are
filtering in is that those divisions
now are deeper than they were four years
ago it's been a very very difficult time
in american politics and what does that
say about the appeal of the left in
america well i think i think what it
says is that we've had
a president over the last four years who
has sought to stoke division rather than
calm those tensions
and we've seen a lot of that sort of
politics that populist style of politics
seeping over here to the united kingdom
don't forget of course that
joe biden once famously described boris
johnson as a political and emotional
clone
of donald trump and we've seen those
attempts by this government as well to
stoke those tensions to start culture
wars
and we've had a very very angry divided
debate
over i think trump has appealed to
people well there's no getting away from
that it's easier to win votes by
stirring people up against one another
than it is to calm this situation i
think what this tells us
is that if joe biden wins as he's
expected but not guaranteed to do
then he is going to have a very very
difficult job on his hands because he
has to unite the american people
and hold them together through what is
widely expected to be the worst
global economic downturn in a century
that is a huge
challenge and that is why i said this
week that britain has to really step up
now
repair those relationships with the
democrats who are seriously
concerned about some of the actions of
the british government recently
and play our part in helping to make
sure that we do pull together
the director general the world health
organization said recently
that the biggest challenge that we now
face globally
is not the virus itself but the lack of
solidarity at both global
and local levels so there is a huge
amount of work to do and britain has to
play its full part
so rose mcgann the question is does the
fact that
donald trump has gained more votes
needed in 2016 shows that his message
resonates with more of the american
people
i think it's a little more complicated
than that it's not
you know what i used to be a democrat
i'm not a republican
i'm kind of in a no man's land but i
grew up in a very unusual way in italy
in what they call a cult
and what i've seen now on both sides is
just that
you know one side thinks the other's
occult the other side thinks the other
is a cult
and the answer is that it's both the
answers at the new york times if there
might be more erudites
you know and telling you that hillary's
gonna win so everyone's shocked
but it's not really reality and the
thing is
is that with the cancel culture thing on
the left which i've been a victim of
have been cancelled many times
but the thing of it is is that just by
not saying bad words or just by thinking
a certain way
doesn't make it that you've actually
accomplished anything
you know the party line when i was a
democrat that i was always fed
was we could accomplish so much if the
republicans wouldn't stop us
now i was a lobbyist in dc i saw behind
the scenes a lot of them they're
incredibly similar and they're credibly
tight
uh the left and the right donald trump
is is
his message is just you know this isn't
working
it's an it's he doesn't do it well he
doesn't speak well to
in my estimation um but he's appealing
to people that are tired of being lied
to
now he's lies as well so it's very
confusing but in a weird way he's he's
a very see transparent liar when he does
lie we can see it
whereas the other ones they hide it much
better and i don't think it's as easy as
we need to join hands and sing kumbaya
there's a lot going down in the u.s and
it's frankly
isn't weird opinion but it needs to
happen and it's very sad
but this is two sides have been lied to
for so long
that it's very hard to see the truth
anymore
hands up amongst our audience alex
i was going to agree there with rose i
think it's very easy to win votes when
you
are not held to account for what you're
saying i mean we've seen in the past 24
hours trump
and his party claiming to have won
elections that they haven't
um and there didn't seem to be any
consequences for that and i think again
that's seeping into british politics
where
people aren't held to account for what
they say this doesn't seem to be any
regulation
of of people's you know claims in the
past so it's easy to win votes when you
just say what people want to hear and
then never have to follow up on them
get minter exactly the same point as
alex i think there's just so much
misinformation out there and
we are not all starting at the same base
with the same truth
uh people have so much news from social
media
and we don't know what i'll say what's
truth and what's lies
so i think it's just really important to
regulate again what alex said
so people are not allowed to say kind of
lies and things like you know
world beating tests and trace system
when
and simon i mean when you talk to people
who who support trump obviously
as jan does men say well that's
patronizing to us
we we know what we're voting for we know
what we're hearing
and we like it you know don't tell us
that we're just being taken in
and clearly we don't know how this
election is yet going to turn out but
what
certainly has not happened is that biden
is not romping home and trump is not
being beaten into a corner
yeah i mean look i i don't know a huge
amount about what
the people in america are thinking and
at least seems to be far more connected
to
you know the entire american nation than
i am but it does it does amaze me that
um trump has done so well and i think
the question we've got to ask is really
about the political class in america and
potentially about our own political
class
because we have to remember that trump
didn't isn't a career politician he came
from outside politics
how has he managed to break into this
world and become president
and the answer i think it comes down to
the lack of connection between the
political class
and what people are thinking and part of
that
i think is that we have moved into a
world where people just
aren't prepared to speak their mind it
they're there's just this lack of
authenticity well you can't say that of
donald trump surely that's one thing he
does
no that's exactly right and i think that
is the only way i can explain his
success is that he
you know love him or hate him and i have
to say i i would not vote for him
but he is authentic he is speaking from
the heart he is
speaking his mind he doesn't care what
he says he doesn't care about the
consequences
and i i think that um overly cautious
approach that political classes around
the world are beginning to take and the
sort of
half answers that they are forced to
being
to give means that people like trump can
suddenly break through because they're
prepared to speak their mind and i think
it has to be a wake-up call
to our own political class to say come
on speak your mind
stop following the party line stop just
saying what you think you want us to
hear
tell us what you really think well we'll
be coming to you for that one over in a
minute
uh tom i i broadly agree with what simon
said there but i think what we should be
looking at is
trump's messaging has been all around
he's the protector of the american
people
he's america first he's protected the
economy he's there for the average
american but i think what's happened is
he's
connected a lot of those things with
fear the things he says around the fact
that if biden wins there'll be riots and
pitting different groups against each
other such as immigrants and portraying
them as threats
and generally acting like a bully and be
really divisive but i think
what concerns me more is the fact that
how easy is that division
to and pick even if trump loses and
biden wins
are we ever going to get back to a point
in america where there's less division
and
i mean a much better point
natalie i was gonna say um i think with
trump he's um
i mean i'm no fan but i think he's very
clever
he's a charismatic character he knows
his audience
really really well he knows how to
deliver that message that's going to
land with them and he's got a lot of
loyal supporters so
i'm really not surprised that a lot of
people have really turned out to vote
for him this time
so hannah the question is whether trump
wins or loses
at the moment he's he's not looking on
track to win but we still don't know
does is his does the fact that he's
attracted more votes sure that
his message still resonates with the
american people so i mean i certainly
think that when you're sitting on this
side of the atlantic
it is extremely surprising that
tens of millions of people could
possibly vote for trump i mean that's
certainly
i've got some basic expectations from a
president you know don't make fun of
disabled
people don't you know solicit foreign
interventions that kind of thing i mean
it's really surprising you know i accept
that but i think that wondering why
voters in america didn't make the right
choice as it were is kind of the wrong
question
well that wasn't the question isn't that
isn't the question
no i i mean more as in the the fact that
people are surprised
uh it sort of implies that we're
wondering why people didn't make a
different decision
um and i think that in a way that's the
that's not the right way to think about
things
because because essentially you know
you've got all these people who are
overlooking concerns
on um you know sexual assaults or
concerns on
on i mean basically playing fast news to
the constitution
and still choosing him and i think that
um
why do you think they are well i think i
i think it's not about
whether people um couldn't be persuaded
i think it's about people not feeling
like they're represented
and i think there are a lot of people in
america who are very deeply unhappy
there's lots of studies that show this
there's a study that demonstrates that
well-being in uh
in america has been declining for 25
years particularly in
in prime age white men who have lower
educational outcomes
i mean there are things like um you know
the opioid death suicides
alcohol use all of that is in this group
of people who are also trump voters
and i think unless you get to the core
of what it is that people are
unhappy about and why they don't feel
like they're being represented
i think that's the only way that you'll
really answer why trump is so appealing
i mean obviously that's not all trump
voters i'm sure no no dan would say
ricky yes thanks um just
going off what tom's just said i think
if joe biden does win
that's more than just his first term if
he
goes for a second term um of rebuilding
really looking at what society does we
have to look after each other
and the divide and conquer on the
division um we've had too much of that
how can we work for each other how i put
a face mask on to protect
someone else not just for my myself the
other point i just wanted to raise was
there's an interesting piece on news
night last night about polling
and how actually um many people lie to
pollsters about who they actually are
going to vote for
and i wonder whether there's something
similar here are people
open with their political views and if
not why not
abby thanks fiona i mean my sense is
that it's not necessarily that people
that his message resonates with people
that trump's message resonates
it's more coming back to the point that
i think simon made before around the
authenticity and the transparency
that trump conveys to some people i
think that people are fed up of just
hearing you know the party line and
hearing politicians
come out with very rehearsed and very
scripted communications and what they're
looking for is that transparency and
that openness that perception of
openness
at least um and where trump is on
twitter all of the time he gives them
that
he gives them that sense of transparency
and that's really what engenders their
trust and
to me i think that that's actually more
compelling to people than his actual
message
this is a fairly unique thing that may
be about to happen in america there have
only been
three occasions in presidential election
history where the sitting president has
not won a second term of office
so this is this would be a big move by
the american people i think
there is a danger in this debate that we
give far too much credence to the idea
that
this would be in some sense is a victory
for donald trump it would be an almost
unique
moment in american history well we've
had two people now talk about
how compelling openness and transparency
and authenticity is from our politicians
which is obviously cue
uh ourselves we haven't yet heard
perfectly we haven't yet heard from you
oliver so so i i
i want to hear from you so we don't have
to we know we don't want any party lines
tonight
uh absolutely so so
a trump win would be better for the
government wouldn't it
no not at all i mean we uh in the uk
have worked with presidents from both
perspectives i've seen it myself and
when i first
at least you've met
very effectively with barack obama for
many years
and um theresa may and indeed boris
johnson worked
very well with president trump and i've
certainly
given up as a politician trying to
predict elections in this country let
alone in the united states but
i think one thing is a real cause for
celebration is the fact that the
greatest
nation in the world in terms of its
military power its economic power
is deciding its fate not like the most
the rest of
most of the rest of the world is not
being decided by a political elite it's
not been decided by the army
it's been decided by the people of
america and i think so what do you think
about
about the fact that donald trump has is
trying to
uh depending on your point of view some
would say interfere some would say
correct
the results coming in from the election
he's talked about fraud he talked about
corruption
and he's got legal suits going in a
number of states
well we're well used to this happening
in the united states and it's happened
and you remember
we are not well no we're not used to
hang on we are not used to
a sitting president accusing is saying
that the electoral system is
fraudulent and corrupt well i think i
can't think of the time it goes back to
the 2000
election there was similarly it ended up
in the courts but what it wasn't about
fraud
what is enduring about the united states
and indeed this country
is that our nations are built on these
democratic values in fact
this weekend as we look to the armistice
those are the values we've shared that's
the values we've fought and died for and
i'm absolutely sure
that the u.s constitution can withstand
either the continuation or the change of
president depending on what
the american people decide jan since
you've been good enough to join us for
this part part of the debate this
evening
i just wonder what your response is or
what your view is is of
uh president trump's comments about
fraud and corruption in the electoral
system
well is there a couple of points that
i'd like to make
trump the people that didn't vote for
trump in the last election and voted for
him in this election
was because he delivered on every
promise he
made i have friends who
can't stand to listen to him and they
don't
but they support they vote for him and
he hasn't quite delivered on every
promise i mean the mexicans haven't paid
for the wall have they as far as i'm
aware
um oh
well you know everyone apart from that
one then
yeah yeah but on on really critical
and for 30 years actually i would even
say 40 years
we have had a very divisive nation
and i don't believe that biden's going
to be able to
pull it together but where trump
made a mistake is that with covid
people were exhausted people were
hurting
and so he didn't show enough
empathy to reach out for those people
to join him and i agree that
sometimes i just want to say could you
keep your mouth shut um
but he knows what he's doing
as you've got your hand up
thank you um let's say he's it's a
typical trump thing he completes
divisive
this is what he always does during the
first debate you saw him just
interrupting by them
constantly and this is him yet again
doing his things
and to say that people are voting for
him
more now than before it's it's just
because
those republicans who didn't vote last
time are now scared
about biden that's the only reason the
votes have gone up nothing to do what
he's done it's not these policies
so um sorry
jam sorry it is policies you know to
make that kind of blanket assumption
we we ended up having
in our the different rallies
we registered democrats who were going
to vote for him so it's not just the
republicans
and the fear on the democrat side
was because bernie sanders and
alexandria
ocasio-cortez were so vocal and have an
incredible following
there was a fear that we were going to
go
really far left but what came out was
that
they really do believe that biden is
more moderate and the blue wave didn't
happen
and they ended up losing in the house
um and in the senate but
it really made a statement that the
voters
want us to come together more because we
have
got to get back to being moderate
rose i think what people
maybe don't quite get is that america is
not a democracy
uh it's an oligarchy it's run by
corporations and as many democrats and
as many republicans have been presidents
really in the last 30 to 40 years it's
gone like on high
in that direction you know yes do the
democrats hear what people want yes do
they do it
no because it's been proven and studied
that only if
if it's something that the corporations
want as well then it'll happen but if
it's
people that want it ah there's other
people to blame and what i continually
hear is trump bashing
it's very easy to bash him i'm not
saying i don't but i'm saying in this
moment
you know you're talking about credibly
accused of sexual assault
that's been really kept out of the
headlines with uh joe biden
and there's people that are just which
he's denied of course i have to say
corruption on both sides
of course a legend it's corruption on
both sides
it's not just one it's that one has
better optics
and that would be the democrats rebecca
i know i'd like to come back to
something i think lisa mentioned that
this isn't a victory for trump but at
the same time it's clearly not
a victory for buyer and outright at the
moment either
and i think that's something that's
really important from this election i
think it
enables us to look a little bit into the
future um many of the same cultural
issues are affecting the us we've seen
our own
um and what's clearly the case is that
um these approaches you know these more
centuries is more
sort of just being the kind of
anti-trump and
just being less extreme isn't cutting
through
so i think the thing that needs to be
thought through from our opposition
party is about how they can actually
deal with some of these issues
together caroline
i was going to go back to jan's point
about the coronavirus
and ask that do you think trump's
attitude towards the virus
has potentially put americans off voting
for him if the vote does go
more towards biden well i think jan
that's what you're saying isn't it
is that something that has perhaps cost
trump
it did it did cost trump um there were
many of his supporters who voted for him
that because in press conferences he was
up front saying i need to be a
cheerleader i don't
want the people to get in panic
but he didn't come out
with any sensitivity and i'll tell you
the other thing that really
has bothered me is that in his rallies
of the last few days before we voted was
he was using himself as look how quickly
i got
over covet because we have um
uh rem de severe
and um that doesn't make people
feel that he's focusing on
getting things done because he keeps
talking about the vaccine
but he's not saying anything
about the people that have lost people
and the fact that one month
fauci was telling us no masks then
next month masks are good um
and he's the president so he's getting
the blame but if i could also add
um i don't know if you have this
perspective
that it's not just trump that has his
lawyers going
because biden had his lawyers
lawyers going to try to get voter id
off um no signature needed and we've
seen we've seen that
there are there are legal uh the legal
case has been brought on both sides
there is only one person who's accused
the electoral system of fraud and
corruption which
which is donald trump which is the
reason reason i mentioned it is i think
we could talk about the election
sometime
we don't have the result i thought we
might get it tonight it doesn't look
like we're going to
uh maybe we'll wake up tomorrow and
we'll have the results so i'm going to
move on to another topic but for now
john i just want to thank you for
joining us and give us your perspective
on this is
obviously very interesting hear what you
had to say thank you very much indeed
you